

 
 
 
 
 
 

 NAIC Releases First-of-Its-Kind National Analysis of Homeowners Insurance Market Trends

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 Skip to main content
 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 Mega Menu

 

 

 
 
 
 Regulator
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 Regulator

 We provide tools and resources to help regulators set standards and best practices, provide regulatory support functions, and educate on U.S. state-based insurance regulation.

 
 Learn More
 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 Events and Meetings

 Explore future meetings and access past event documents.

 
 

 

 
 
 Expense Reporting

 Access forms and tools to file expense reports, review grant and zone scholarship balances, and travel guidelines.

 
 

 

 
 
 myNAIC

 Access technology tools and resources for U.S. insurance regulators.

 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 Education and Training

 
 
 Overview
 

 
 Training for Regulators
 

 
 Insurance Regulator Professional Designation Program
 

 
 20th Anniversary: Designation Program
 

 
 International Fellows Program
 

 
 Regulatory Leadership Development
 

 
 Webinars and Training Events
 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 Awards

 
 
 Robert Dineen Award
 

 
 Raymond G. Farmer Award for Exceptional Leadership
 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 Industry
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 Education and Events

 
 
 Education and Training
 

 
 Events and Meetings
 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 Industry

 Access forms, tools, and resources for individuals and organizations to file forms, improve efficiency, and remain compliant.

 
 Learn More
 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 Financial Statement Filing

 
 
 Filing Information
 

 
 Filing Instructions
 

 
 InsData
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 Uniform Certificate of Authority

 
 
 Overview
 

 
 State Specific Requirements
 

 
 Electronic Application
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 Principle Based Reserving

 
 
 Overview
 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 Securities Valuation Office

 
 
 Overview
 

 
 Resources
 

 
 Security Investment Filing
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 Market Conduct

 
 
 Market Conduct Annual Statement
 

 
 Contacts and Scorecards
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 Insurance Compact

 
 
 Homepage
 

 
 Record Adopted Standards
 

 
 Insurer Resources
 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 Structured Securities Group

 
 
 Overview
 

 
 Collateralized Loan Obligations
 

 
 RMBS/CMBS Listing
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 Data Calls

 
 
 2026 Homeowners Market Data Call
 

 
 State Disaster Reporting
 

 
 Health AI/ML Survey
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 Producer Registry

 
 
 Homepage
 

 
 Renew a License
 

 
 Producer Database
 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 Products

 
 
 Overview
 

 
 Account Manager
 

 
 Automated Valuation Service
 

 
 Data Products
 

 
 Online Premium Tax Filing
 

 
 State Based Systems
 

 
 System for Electronic Rates and Forms Filings
 

 
 Technology Applications (myNAIC)
 

 
 Vision
 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 Consumer
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 Consumer

 Discover tools and resources to help you understand different types of insurance, claims processes, and practical tips to help support you through every stage of your life. 

 
 Learn More
 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 File a Complaint

 Having a problem with an insurance company or agent?

 
 

 

 
 
 Glossary of Insurance Terms

 Browse terms and definitions that are commonly used in the insurance industry

 
 

 

 
 
 Consumer Participation Program

 Discover how you can participate in insurance consumer protection efforts.

 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 Insurance Advice

 
 
 Auto Insurance
 

 
 Cybersecurity
 

 
 Flood Insurance
 

 
 Health Insurance
 

 
 Homeowners Insurance
 

 
 Life Insurance & Annuities
 

 
 Long-Term Care Insurance
 

 
 Military
 

 
 Sharing Economy
 

 
 Small Business
 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 Mobile Apps

 
 
 Home Inventory
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 Interactive Learning

 
 
 Go-Bag Disaster Prep
 

 
 Understand Your Insurance Card
 

 
 What The Flood?! Quiz
 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 Tools

 
 
 Consumer Insurance Search
 

 
 Life Insurance Policy Locator
 

 
 Global Receivership Information System
 

 
 Online Fraud Reporting System
 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 Committees
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 Events

 
 
 Events and Meetings
 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 Committees

 View actions considered by committees, task forces, and subgroups, as well as charges, schedules, and staff links.

 
 Learn More
 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 Conference Calls

 Access public conference call documents and information.

 
 

 

 
 
 Exposure Drafts

 Documents exposed by various committee workgroups.

 
 

 

 
 
 Liaison and Advisory Groups

 Representatives from diverse groups who provide varied perspectives on insurance regulatory issues.

 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 Committee Index

 
 
 Executive (EX)
 

 
 Life Insurance and Annuities (A)
 

 
 Health Insurance and Managed Care (B)
 

 
 Property and Casualty Insurance (C)
 

 
 Market Regulation and Consumer Affairs (D)
 

 
 Financial Condition (E)
 

 
 Financial Regulation Standards and Accreditation (F)
 

 
 International Insurance Relations (G)
 

 
 Innovation, Cybersecurity, and Technology (H)
 

 
 Consumer Liaison
 

 
 View All
 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 Trending

 
 
 Annuity Buyer's Guide (A) Working Group
 

 
 Invested Assets (E) Task Force
 

 
 Blanks (E) Working Group
 

 
 Investment Analysis (E) Working Group
 

 
 Credit Rating Provider (E) Working Group
 

 
 Reciprocal Exchanges (E) Working Group
 

 
 Statutory Accounting Principles (E) Working Group
 

 
 Life Actuarial (A) Task Force
 

 
 Big Data Artificial Intelligence (H) Working Group
 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 Resource Center
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 Resource Center

 Explore recent publications, the latest news articles, new federal and legislative news, and model laws to help inform your approach.

 
 Learn More
 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 Capital Markets Bureau

 Developments and trends in financial markets and insurer investments.

 
 

 

 
 
 Center for Insurance Policy and Research

 Research and analysis on important insurance issues.

 
 

 

 
 
 Glossary

 A glossary of insurance terms and definitions.

 
 

 

 
 
 Government Affairs

 Domestic and international policy and outreach initiatives.

 
 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 Health Coverage Policy and Regulation

 Answers regarding health care law and insurance.

 
 

 

 
 
 Insurance Topics

 Information on a range of insurance regulatory issues.

 
 

 

 
 
 Legal

 Legal support and advice on regulatory issues and internal operations.

 
 

 

 
 
 Library

 Archives and regulatory resources.

 
 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 Model Laws

 Access to every published model law, regulation, and guideline

 
 

 

 
 
 Newsroom

 The latest news and consumer articles.

 
 

 

 
 
 Publications

 Exclusive, industry-focused manuals, data, and more.

 
 

 

 
 
 State Insurance Charts

 Issue-specific charts, combining states' statutes and regulations.

 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 Featured Topics

 
 
 Private Credit
 

 
 Travel Insurance
 

 
 Risk-Based Capital
 

 
 Artificial Intelligence
 

 
 Terrorism Risk Insurance Act
 

 
 Statutory Accounting Principles
 

 
 Life Insurance
 

 
 Captive Insurance Companies
 

 
 Surplus Lines
 

 
 Insurance Fraud
 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 Insurance Departments
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 Insurance Departments

 Find contact information for insurance departments and local insurance agents, or file a complaint.

 
 Learn more
 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 Insurance Departments

 Select a state or jurisdiction for insurance department contact information.

 
 
 Select State
 
 
 Alabama
 
 
 Alaska
 
 
 American Samoa
 
 
 Arizona
 
 
 Arkansas
 
 
 California
 
 
 Colorado
 
 
 Connecticut
 
 
 Delaware
 
 
 District Of Columbia
 
 
 Florida
 
 
 Georgia
 
 
 Guam
 
 
 Hawaii
 
 
 Idaho
 
 
 Illinois
 
 
 Indiana
 
 
 Iowa
 
 
 Kansas
 
 
 Kentucky
 
 
 Louisiana
 
 
 Maine
 
 
 Maryland
 
 
 Massachusetts
 
 
 Michigan
 
 
 Minnesota
 
 
 Mississippi
 
 
 Missouri
 
 
 Montana
 
 
 Nebraska
 
 
 Nevada
 
 
 New Hampshire
 
 
 New Jersey
 
 
 New Mexico
 
 
 New York
 
 
 North Carolina
 
 
 North Dakota
 
 
 Northern Mariana Islands
 
 
 Ohio
 
 
 Oklahoma
 
 
 Oregon
 
 
 Pennsylvania
 
 
 Puerto Rico
 
 
 Rhode Island
 
 
 South Carolina
 
 
 South Dakota
 
 
 Tennessee
 
 
 Texas
 
 
 Utah
 
 
 Vermont
 
 
 Virgin Islands
 
 
 Virginia
 
 
 Washington
 
 
 West Virginia
 
 
 Wisconsin
 
 
 Wyoming
 
 Go
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 About
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 About

 The NAIC provides expertise, data, and analysis for insurance commissioners to effectively regulate the insurance industry and protect consumers.

 
 Learn More
 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 State Connected

 Our three-year blueprint for the future shows the way toward building on existing strengths.

 
 

 

 
 
 150 Years of Collaboration

 Browse our timeline to learn how we support insurance regulators in their mission to protect consumers and ensure fair and healthy insurance markets.

 
 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 Contact

 Have a question? We're here to help.

 
 

 

 
 
 Budget

 Learn more about our transparent budgeting process and overall operations.

 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 Careers

 
 
 Overview
 

 
 Benefits
 

 
 Open Positions
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 New Avenues to Insurance Careers Foundation

 
 
 Overview
 

 
 Internship Opportunities
 

 
 About
 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 Requests

 
 
 Request a Speaker
 

 
 Request to Use Content
 

 
 Request to Reprint Content
 

 
 Request Consumer Guide Printing
 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 Search
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search NAIC

 
 
 Search
 
 
 
 

 Recommended

 
 Insurance Summit
 International Forum
 N.A.I.C. Foundation
 Insurance Departments Contacts
 Consumer Insurance Search
 Insurance Terms
 

 

 

 

 

 
 ×
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 Industry

 
 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Back to Newsroom

 
 News Release
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 KANSAS CITY, Mo. (Aug. 5, 2026)

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 NAIC Releases First-of-Its-Kind National Analysis of Homeowners Insurance Market Trends 

 New report provides most comprehensive look ever at state-collected data on premiums, claims, non-renewals, and market performance from 2018 through 2024 

 

 

 
 
 
The National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) has released a first-of-its-kind analysis of homeowners insurance market trends based on seven years of Market Conduct Annual Statement (MCAS) data collected by state insurance departments. The report, Examining Homeowner Property Insurance Market Dynamics: An Assessment of Countrywide State-Level Data From 2018 to 2024, provides a comprehensive view of the homeowners insurance market and establishes a baseline for future analysis as state insurance regulators continue to address affordability, availability, and market conditions nationwide.  

The report reveals a homeowners insurance market that remains operationally strong overall, with broad insurer participation and improved underwriting results in 2024. It also documents the challenges many consumers have experienced in recent years, including rising premiums, increased non-renewals, and higher claims costs.  

“As we work to maintain healthy and competitive insurance markets, state insurance regulators are committed to ensuring consumers have access to reliable homeowners insurance coverage,” said Virginia Insurance Commissioner and NAIC President Scott White. “This report provides authoritative and data-driven insights into market conditions across the country and further empowers informed decision-making by regulators, policymakers and other stakeholders.” 

Drawing on data reported by insurers to state regulators between 2018 and 2024, the report highlights several key findings: 

The homeowners insurance market remains broad and active, with 715 companies writing homeowners coverage in 2024 and underwriting results improving across all four NAIC geographic regions.  

Average premium per policy increased across every NAIC region since 2018, with inflation-adjusted increases ranging from 18.3% to 43.3%, to the effect of average premium increases of 2.4% to 5.3% per year.

During the same period, company-initiated non-renewal rates increased between 96% and 216%, depending on region. Claim frequency and severity also generally increased, particularly between 2021 and 2024.  

Market conditions vary across regions, underscoring that homeowners insurance remains a local market influenced by factors such as weather risk, rebuilding costs, claims patterns, and insurer participation.  

The MCAS report provides an important national and regional baseline ahead of the more granular analysis on coverage availability, costs, claims experience, mitigation efforts, and consumer options being obtained through the NAIC’s Homeowners Market Data Call, which regulators will be analyzing in the months ahead.  

Resources 

Examining Homeowner Property Insurance Market Dynamics: An Assessment of Countrywide State-Level Data From 2018 to 2024  

 

 

 
 
 About the National Association of Insurance Commissioners

 As part of our state-based system of insurance regulation in the United States, the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) provides expertise, data, and analysis for insurance commissioners to effectively regulate the industry and protect consumers. The U.S. standard-setting organization is governed by the chief insurance regulators from the 50 states, the District of Columbia and five U.S. territories. Through the NAIC, state insurance regulators establish standards and best practices, conduct peer reviews, and coordinate regulatory oversight. NAIC staff supports these efforts and represents the collective views of state regulators domestically and internationally.

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Services

 
 
 
 Services

 

 
 
 
 
 MyNAIC
 
 
 
 iSite+
 
 
 
 Financial Statement Filing
 
 
 
 Account Manager
 

 

 
 
 
 Resources

 
 
 
 Resources

 

 
 
 
 
 Resource Center
 
 
 
 Newsroom
 
 
 
 Publications
 
 
 
 Meetings and Events
 
 
 
 Education and Training
 
 
 
 Glossary of Insurance Terms
 

 

 
 
 
 Support

 
 
 
 Support

 

 
 
 
 
 Contact
 
 
 
 Help
 
 
 
 Careers
 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 © 1991-2026 National Association of Insurance Commissioners.
All rights reserved.
Stop.Call.Confirm is a registered service mark of the National Association of Insurance Commissioners.

Privacy Policy
Accessibility
Connect
Workplace
Web CMS

 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 

